	N
K





Appendix H

Glossary



address:  Number representing the location of a byte in memory.
Within CP/M there are two kinds of addresses:  logical and physical.
A physical address refers to an absolute and unique location within
the computer's memory space.  A logical address refers to the offset
or displacement of a byte in relation to a base location.  A
standard CP/M program is loaded at address 0100H, the base value;
the first instruction of a program has a physical address of 0100H
and a relative address or offset of OH.

allocation vector (ALV):  An allocation vector is maintained in the
BIOS for each logged-in disk drive.  A vector consists of a string
of bits, one for each block on the drive.  The bit corresponding to
a particular block is set to one when the block has been allocated
and to zero otherwise.  The first two bytes of this vector are
initialized with the bytes AL0 and AL1 on, thus allocating the
directory blocks.  CP/M Function 27 returns the allocation vector
address.

AL0, AL1:  Two bytes in the disk parameter block that reserve data
blocks for the directory.  These two bytes are copied into the first
two bytes of the allocation vector when a drive is logged in.  See
allocation vector.

ALV:  See allocation vector.

ambiguous filename:  Filename that contains either of the CP/M
wildcard characters, ?  or *, in the primary filename, filetype, or
both.  When you replace characters in a filename with these wildcard
characters, you create an ambiguous filename and can easily
reference more than one CP/M file in a single command line.

American Standard Code for Information Interchange:  See ASCII.

applications program:  Program designed to solve a specific problem.
Typical applications programs are business accounting packages, word
processing (editing) programs and mailing list programs.

archive attribute:  File attribute controlled by the high-order bit
of the t3 byte (FCB+11) in a directory element.  This attribute is
set if the file has been archived.

argument:  Symbol, usually a letter, indicating a place into which
you can substitute a number, letter, or name to give an appropriate
meaning to the formula in question.

ASCII:  American Standard Code for Information Interchange.  ASCII
is a standard set of seven-bit numeric character codes used to
represent characters in memory.  Each character requires one byte of
memory with the high-order bit usually set to zero.  Characters can


                               H-1





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


be numbers, letters, and symbols.  An ASCII file can be intelligibly
displayed on the video screen or printed on paper.

assembler:  Program that translates assembly language into the
binary machine code.  Assembly language is simply a set of mnemonics
used to designate the instruction set of the CPU.  See ASM in
Section 3 of this manual.

back-up:  Copy of a disk or file made for safekeeping, or the
creation of the duplicate disk or file.

Basic Disk Operating System:  See BDOS.

BDOS:  Basic Disk Operating System.  The BDOS module of the CP/M
operating system provides an interface for a user program to the
operating system.  This interface is in the form of a set of
function calls which may be made to the BDOS through calls to
location 0005H in page zero.  The user program specifies the number
of the desired function in register C.  User programs running under
CP/M should use BDOS functions for all I/O operations to remain
compatible with other CP/M systems and future releases.  The BDOS
normally resides in high memory directly below the BIOS.

bias:  Address value which when added to the origin address of your
BIOS module produces 1F80H, the address of the BIOS module in the
MOVCPM image.  There is also a bias value that when added to the
BOOT module origin produces 0900H, the address of the BOOT module in
the MOVCPM image.  You must use these bias values with the R command
under DDT or SID   when you patch a CP/M system.  If you do not, the
patched system may fail to function.

binary:  Base 2 numbering system.  A binary digit can have one of
two values:  0 or 1.  Binary numbers are used in computers because
the hardware can most easily exhibit two states:  off and on.
Generally, a bit in memory represents one binary digit.

Basic Input/Output System:  See BIOS.

BIOS:  Basic Input/Output System.  The BIOS is the only hardware-
dependent module of the CP/M system.  It provides the BDOS with a
set of primitive I/O operations.  The BIOS is an assembly language
module usually written by the user, hardware manufacturer, or
independent software vendor, and is the key to CP/M's portability.
The BIOS interfaces the CP/M system to its hardware environment
through a standardized jump table at the front of the BIOS routine
and through a set of disk parameter tables which define the disk
environment.  Thus, the BIOS provides CP/M with a completely table-
driven I/O system.

BIOS base:  Lowest address of the BIOS module in memory, that by
definition must be the first entry point in the BIOS jump table.






                               H-2





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


bit:  Switch in memory that can be set to on (1) or off (0).  Bits
are grouped into bytes, eight bits to a byte, which is the smallest
directly addressable unit in an Intel 8080 or Zilog Z80.  By common
convention, the bits in a byte are numbered from right, 0 for the
low-order bit, to left, 7 for the high-order bit.  Bit values are
often represented in hexadecimal notation by grouping the bits from
the low-order bit in groups of four.  Each group of four bits can
have a value from 0 to 15 and thus can easily be represented by one
hexadecimal digit.

BLM:  See block mask.

block:  Basic unit of disk space allocation.  Each disk drive has a
fixed block size (BLS) defined in its disk parameter block in the
BIOS.  A block can consist of 1K, 2K, 4K, 8K, or 16K consecutive
bytes.  Blocks are numbered relative to zero so that each block is
unique and has a byte displacement in a file equal to the block
number times the block size.

block mask (BLM):  Byte value in the disk parameter block at DPB +
3.  The block mask is always one less than the number of 128 byte
sectors that are in one block.  Note that BLM = (2 ** BSH) - 1.

block shift (BSH):  Byte parameter in the disk parameter block at
DPB + 2.  Block shift and block mask (BLM) values are determined by
the block size (BLS).  Note that BLM = (2 ** BSH) - 1.

blocking & deblocking algorithm:  In some disk subsystems the disk
sector size is larger than 128 bytes, usually 256, 512, 1024, or
2048 bytes.  When the host sector size is larger than 128 bytes,
host sectors must be buffered in memory and the 128-byte CP/M
sectors must be blocked and deblocked by adding an additional
module, the blocking and deblocking algorithm, between the BIOS disk
I/O routines and the actual disk I/O.  The host sector size must be
an even multiple of 128 bytes for the algorithm to work correctly.
The blocking and deblocking algorithm allows the BDOS and BIOS to
function exactly as if the entire disk consisted only of 128-byte
sectors, as in the standard CP/M installation.

BLS:  Block size in bytes.  See block.

boot:  Process of loading an operating system into memory.  A boot
program is a small piece of code that is automatically executed when
you power-up or reset your computer.  The boot program loads the
rest of the operating system into memory in a manner similar to a
person pulling himself up by his own bootstraps.  This process is
sometimes called a cold boot or cold start.  Bootstrap pocedures
vary from system to system.  The boot program must be customized for
the memory size and hardware environment that the operating system
manages.  Typically, the boot resides on the first sector of the
system tracks on your system disk.  When executed, the boot loads
the remaining sectors of the system tracks into high memory at the
location for which the CP/M system has been configured.  Finally,
the boot transfers execution to the boot entry point in the BIOS
jump table so that the system can initialize itself.  In this case,


                               H-3





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


the boot program should be placed at 900H in the SYSGEN image.
Alternatively, the boot program may be located in ROM.

bootstrap:  See boot.

BSH:  See block shift.

BTREE:  General purpose file access method that has become the
standard organization for indexes in large data base systems.  BTREE
provides near optimum performance over the full range of file
operations, such as insertion, deletion, search, and search next.

buffer:  Area of memory that temporarily stores data during the
transfer of information.

built-in commands:  Commands that permanently reside in memory.
They respond quickly because they are not accessed from a disk.

byte:  Unit of memory or disk storage containing eight bits.  A byte
can represent a binary number between 0 and 255, and is the smallest
unit of memory that can be addressed directly in 8-bit CPUs such as
the Intel 8080 or Zilog Z80.

CCP:  Console Command Processor.  The CCP is a module of the CP/M
operating system.  It is loaded directly below the BDOS module and
interprets and executes commands typed by the console user.  Usually
these commands are programs that the CCP loads and calls.  Upon
completion, a command program may return control to the CCP if it
has not overwritten it.  If it has, the program can reload the CCP
into memory by a warm boot operation initiated by either a jump to
zero, BDOS system reset (Function 0), or a cold boot.  Except for
its location in high memory, the CCP works like any other standard
CP/M program; that is, it makes only BDOS function calls for its I/O
operations.

CCP base:  Lowest address of the CCP module in memory.  This term
sometimes refers to the base of the CP/M system in memory, as the
CCP is normally the lowest CP/M module in high memory.

checksum vector (CSV):  Contiguous data area in the BIOS, with one
byte for each directory sector to be checked, that is, CKS bytes.
See CKS.  A checksum vector is initialized and maintained for each
logged-in drive.  Each directory access by the system results in a
checksum calculation that is compared with the one in the checksum
vector.  If there is a discrepancy, the drive is set to Read-Only
status.  This feature prevents the user from inadvertently switching
disks without logging in the new disk.  If the new disk is not
logged-in, it is treated the same as the old one, and data on it
might be destroyed if writing is done.

CKS:  Number of directory records to be checked summed on directory
accesses.  This is a parameter in the disk parameter block located
in the BIOS.  If the value of CKS is zero, then no directory records
are checked.  CKS is also a parameter in the diskdef macro library,
where it is the actual number of directory elements to be checked
rather than the number of directory records.

                               H-4





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary



cold boot:  See boot.  Cold boot also refers to a jump to the boot
entry point in the BIOS jump table.

COM:  Filetype for a CP/M command file.  See command file.

command:  CP/M command line.  In general, a CP/M command line has
three parts:  the command keyword, command tail, and a carriage
return.  To execute a command, enter a CP/M command line directly
after the CP/M prompt at the console and press the carriage return
or enter key.

command file:  Executable program file of filetype COM.  A command
file is a machine language object module ready to be loaded and
executed at the absolute address of 0100H.  To execute a command
file, enter its primary filename as the command keyword in a CP/M
command line.

command keyword:  Name that identifies a CP/M command, usually the
primary filename of a file of type COM, or a built-in command.  The
command keyword precedes the command tail and the carriage return in
the command line.

command syntax:  Statement that defines the correct way to enter a
command.  The correct structure generally includes the command
keyword, the command tail, and a carriage return.  A syntax line
usually contains symbols that you should replace with actual values
when you enter the command.

command tail:  Part of a command that follows the command keyword in
the command line.  The command tail can include a drive
specification, a filename and filetype, and options or parameters.
Some commands do not require a command tail.

CON:  Mnemonic that represents the CP/M console device.  For
example, the CP/M command PIP CON:=TEST.SUB displays the file
TEST.SUB on the console device.  The explanation of the STAT command
tells how to assign the logical device CON: to various physical
devices.  See console.

concatenate:  Name of the PIP operation that copies two or more
separate files into one new file in the the specified sequence.

concurrency:  Execution of two processes or operations
simultaneously.

CONIN:  BIOS entry point to a routine that reads a character from
the console device.

CONOUT:  BIOS entry point to a routine that sends a character to the
console device.






                               H-5





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


console:  Primary input/output device.  The console consists of a
listing device, such as a screen or teletype, and a keyboard through
which the user communicates with the operating system or
applications program.

Console Command Processor:  See CCP.

CONST:  BIOS entry point to a routine that returns the status of the
console device.

control character:  Nonprinting character combination.  CP/M
interprets some control characters as simple commands such as line
editing functions.  To enter a control character, hold down the
CONTROL key and strike the specified character key.

Control Program for Microcomputers:  See CP/M.

CP/M:  Control Program for Microcomputers.  An operating system that
manages computer resources and provides a standard systems interface
to software written for a large variety of microprocessor-based
computer systems.

CP/M 1.4l compatibility:  For a CP/M 2 system to be able to read
correctly single-density disks produced under a CP/M 1.4 system, the
extent mask must be zero and the block size 1K.  This is because
under CP/M 2 an FCB may contain more than one extent.  The number of
extents that may be contained by an FCB is EXM+1.  The issue of CP/M
1.4 compatibility also concerns random file I/O.  To perform random
file I/O under CP/M 1.4, you must maintain an FCB for each extent of
the file.  This scheme is upward compatible with CP/M 2 for files
not exceeding 512K bytes, the largest file size supported under CP/M
1.4.  If you wish to implement random I/O for files larger than 512K
bytes under CP/M 2, you must use the random read and random write
functions, BDOS functions 33, 34, and 36.  In this case, only one
FCB is used, and if CP/M 1.4 compatiblity is required, the program
must use the return version number function, BDOS Function 12, to
determine which method to employ.

CP/M prompt:  Characters that indicate that CP/M is ready to execute
your next command.  The CP/M prompt consists of an upper-case
letter, A-P, followed by a > character; for example, A>.  The letter
designates which drive is currently logged in as the default drive.
CP/M will search this drive for the command file specified, unless
the command is a built-in command or prefaced by a select drive
command: for example, B:STAT.

CP/NET:  Digital Research network operating system enabling
microcomputers to obtain access to common resources via a network.
CP/NET consists of MP/M masters and CP/M slaves with a network
interface between them.

CSV:  See checksum vector.

cursor:  One-character symbol that can appear anywhere on the
console screen.  The cursor indicates the position where the next
keystroke at the console will have an effect.

                               H-6





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary



data file:  File containing information that will be processed by a
program.

deblocking:  See blocking & deblocking algorithm.

default:  Currently selected disk drive and user number.  Any
command that does not specify a disk drive or a user number
references the default disk drive and user number.  When CP/M is
first invoked, the default disk drive is drive A, and the default
user number is 0.

default buffer:  Default 128-byte buffer maintained at 0080H in page
zero.  When the CCP loads a COM file, this buffer is initialized to
the command tail; that is, any characters typed after the COM file
name are loaded into the buffer.  The first byte at 0080H contains
the length of the command tail, while the command tail itself begins
at 0081H.  The command tail is terminated by a byte containing a
binary zero value.  The I command under DDT and SID initializes this
buffer in the same way as the CCP.

default FCB:  Two default FCBs are maintained by the CCP at 005CH
and 006CH in page zero.  The first default FCB is initialized from
the first delimited field in the command tail.  The second default
FCB is initialized from the next field in the command tail.

delimiter:  Special characters that separate different items in a
command line; for example, a colon separates the drive specification
from the filename.  The CCP recognizes the following characters as
delimiters:  . : = ; < > _, blank, and carriage return.  Several
CP/M commands also treat the following as delimiter characters: , [
] ( ) $.  It is advisable to avoid the use of delimiter characters
and lower-case characters in CP/M filenames.

DIR:  Parameter in the diskdef macro library that specifies the
number of directory elements on the drive.

DIR attribute:  File attribute.  A file with the DIR attribute can
be displayed by a DIR command.  The file can be accessed from the
default user number and drive only.

DIRBUF:  128-byte scratchpad area for directory operations, usually
located at the end of the BIOS.  DIRBUF is used by the BDOS during
its directory operations.  DIRBUF also refers to the two-byte
address of this scratchpad buffer in the disk parameter header at
DPbase + 8 bytes.

directory:  Portion of a disk that contains entries for each file on
the disk.  In response to the DIR command, CP/M displays the
filenames stored in the directory.  The directory also contains the
locations of the blocks allocated to the files.  Each file directory
element is in the form of a 32-byte FCB, although one file can have
several elements, depending on its size.  The maximum number of
directory elements supported is specified by the drive's disk
parameter block value for DRM.


                               H-7





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


directory element:  Data structure.  Each file on a disk has one or
more 32-byte directory elements associated with it.  There are four
directory elements per directory sector.  Directory elements can
also be referred to as directory FCBs.

directory entry:  File entry displayed by the DIR command.
Sometimes this term refers to a physical directory element.

disk, diskette:  Magnetic media used for mass storage in a computer
system.  Programs and data are recorded on the disk in the same way
music can be recorded on cassette tape.  The CP/M operating system
must be initially loaded from disk when the computer is turned on.
Diskette refers to smaller capacity removable floppy diskettes,
while disk may refer to either a diskette, removable cartridge disk,
or fixed hard disk.  Hard disk capacities range from five to several
hundred megabytes of storage.

diskdef macro library:  Library of code that when used with MAC, the
Digital Research macro assembler, creates disk definition tables
such as the DPB and DPH automatically.

disk drive:  Peripheral device that reads and writes information on
disk.  CP/M assigns a letter to each drive under its control.  For
example, CP/M may refer to the drives in a four-drive system as A,
B, C, and D.

disk parameter block (DPB):  Data structure referenced by one or
more disk parameter headers.  The disk parameter block defines disk
characteristics in the fields listed below:

     SPT is the total number of sectors per track.
     BSH is the data allocation block shift factor.
     BLM is the data allocation block mask.
     EXM is the extent mask determined by BLS and DSM.
     DSM is the maximum data block number.
     DRM is the maximum number of directory entries--1.
     AL0 reserves directory blocks.
     AL1 reserves directory blocks.
     CKS is the number of directory sectors check summed.
     OFF is the number of reserved system tracks.

The address of the disk parameter block is located in the disk
parameter header at DPbase +0AH.  CP/M Function 31 returns the DPB
address.  Drives with the same characteristics can use the same disk
parameter header, and thus the same DPB.  However, drives with
different characteristics must each have their own disk parameter
header and disk parameter blocks.  When the BDOS calls the SELDSK
entry point in the BIOS, SELDSK must return the address of the
drive's disk parameter header in register HL.

disk parameter header (DPH):  Data structure that contains
information about the disk drive and provides a scratchpad area for
certain BDOS operations.  The disk parameter header contains six
bytes of scratchpad area for the BDOS, and the following five 2-byte
parameters:


                               H-8





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary



     XLT is the sector translation table address.
     DIRBUF is the directory buffer address.
     DPB is the disk parameter block address.
     CSV is the checksum vector address.
     ALV is the allocation vector address.

Given n disk drives, the disk parameter headers are arranged in a
table whose first row of 16 bytes corresponds to drive 0, with the
last row corresponding to drive n-1.

DKS:  Parameter in the diskdef macro library specifying the number
of data blocks on the drive.

DMA:  Direct Memory Access.  DMA is a method of transferring data
from the disk into memory directly.  In a CP/M system, the BDOS
calls the BIOS entry point READ to read a sector from the disk into
the currently selected DMA address.  The DMA address must be the
address of a 128-byte buffer in memory, either the default buffer at
0080H in page zero, or a user-assigned buffer in the TPA.
Similarly, the BDOS calls the BIOS entry point WRITE to write the
record at the current DMA address to the disk.

DN:  Parameter in the diskdef macro library specifying the logical
drive number.

DPB:  See disk parameter block.

DPH:  See disk parameter header.

DRM:  2-byte parameter in the disk parameter block at DPB + 7.  DRM
is one less than the total number of directory entries allowed for
the drive.  This value is related to DPB bytes AL0 and AL1, which
allocates up to 16 blocks for directory entries.

DSM:  2-byte parameter of the disk parameter block at DPB + 5.  DSM
is the maximum data block number supported by the drive.  The
product BLS times (DSM+1) is the total number of bytes held by the
drive.  This must not exceed the capacity of the physical disk less
the reserved system tracks.

editor:  Utility program that creates and modifies text files.  An
editor can be used for creation of documents or creation of code for
computer programs.  The CP/M editor is invoked by typing the command
ED next to the system prompt on the console.

EX:  Extent number field in an FCB.  See extent.

executable:  Ready to be run by the computer.  Executable code is a
series of instructions that can be carried out by the computer.  For
example, the computer cannot execute names and addresses, but it can
execute a program that prints all those names and addresses on
mailing labels.

execute a program:  Start the processing of executable code.


                               H-9





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary



EXM:  See extent mask.

extent:  16K consecutive bytes in a file.  Extents are numbered from
0 to 31.  One extent can contain 1, 2, 4, 8, or 16 blocks.  EX is
the extent number field of an FCB and is a one-byte field at FCB +
12, where FCB labels the first byte in the FCB.  Depending on the
block size (BLS) and the maximum data block number (DSM), an FCB can
contain 1, 2, 4, 8, or 16 extents.  The EX field is normally set to
0 by the user but contains the current extent number during file
I/O.  The term FCB folding describes FCBs containing more than one
extent.  In CP/M version 1.4, each FCB contained only one extent.
Users attempting to perform random record I/O and maintain CP/M 1.4
compatiblity should be aware of the implications of this difference.
See CP/M 1.4 compatibility.

extent mask (EXM):  A byte parameter in the disk parameter block
located at DPB + 3.  The value of EXM is determined by the block
size (BLS) and whether the maximum data block number (DSM) exceeds
255.  There are EXM + 1 extents per directory FCB.

FCB:  See File Control Block.

file:  Collection of characters, instructions, or data that can be
referenced by a unique identifier.  Files are usually stored on
various types of media, such as disk, or magnetic tape.  A CP/M file
is identified by a file specification and resides on disk as a
collection of from zero to 65,536 records.  Each record is 128 bytes
and can contain either binary or ASCII data.  Binary files contain
bytes of data that can vary in value from 0H to 0FFH.  ASCII files
contain sequences of character codes delineated by a carriage return
and line-feed combination; normally byte values range from 0H to
7FH.  The directory maps the file as a series of physical blocks.
Although files are defined as a sequence of consecutive logical
records, these records can not reside in consecutive sectors on the
disk.  See also block, directory, extent, record, and sector.

File Control Block (FCB): Structure used for accessing files on
disk.  Contains the drive, filename, filetype, and other information
describing a file to be accessed or created on the disk.  A file
control block consists of 36 consecutive bytes specified by the user
for file I/O functions.  FCB can also refer to a directory element
in the directory portion of the allocated disk space.  These contain
the same first 32 bytes of the FCB, but lack the current record and
random record number bytes.

filename:  Name assigned to a file.  A filename can include a
primary filename of one to eight characters; a filetype of zero to
three characters.  A period separates the primary filename from the
filetype.

file specification:  Unique file identifier.  A complete CP/M file
specification includes a disk drive specification followed by a
colon, d:, a primary filename of one to eight characters, a period,
and a filetype of zero to three characters.  For example,
b:example.tex is a complete CP/M file specification.

                               H-10





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary



filetype:  Extension to a filename.  A filetype can be from zero to
three characters and must be separated from the primary filename by
a period.  A filetype can tell something about the file.  Some
programs require that files to be processed have specific filetypes.

floppy disk:  Flexible magnetic disk used to store information.
Floppy disks come in 5 1/4- and 8-inch diameters.

FSC:  Parameter in the diskdef macro library specifying the first
physical sector number.  This parameter is used to determine SPT and
build XLT.

hard disk:  Rigid, platter-like, magnetic disk sealed in a
container.  A hard disk stores more information than a floppy disk.

hardware:  Physical components of a computer.

hexadecimal notation:  Notation for base 16 values using the decimal
digits and letters A, B, C, D, E, and F to represent the 16 digits.
Hexadecimal notation is often used to refer to binary numbers.  A
binary number can be easily expressed as a hexadecimal value by
taking the bits in groups of 4, starting with the least significant
bit, and expressing each group as a hexadecimal digit, 0-F.  Thus
the bit value 1011 becomes 0BH and 10110101 becomes 0B5H.

hex file:  ASCII-printable representation of a command, machine
language, file.

hex file format:  Absolute output of ASM and MAC for the Intel 8080
is a hex format file, containing a sequence of absolute records that
give a load address and byte values to be stored, starting at the
load address.

HOME:  BIOS entry point which sets the disk head of the currently
selected drive to the track zero position.

host:  Physical characteristics of a hard disk drive in a system
using the blocking and deblocking algorithm.  The term, host, helps
distinguish physical hardware characteristics from CP/M's logical
characteristics.  For example, CP/M sectors are always 128 bytes,
although the host sector size can be a multiple of 128 bytes.

input:  Data going into the computer, usually from an operator
typing at the terminal or by a program reading from the disk.

input/output:  See I/O.

interface:  Object that allows two independent systems to
communicate with each other, as an interface between hardware and
software in a microcomputer.

I/O:  Abbreviation for input/output.  Usually refers to input/output
operations or routines handling the input and output of data in the
computer system.


                               H-11





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary



IOBYTE:  A one-byte field in page zero, currently at location 0003H,
that can support a logical-to-physical device mapping for I/O.
However, its implementation in your BIOS is purely optional and
might or might not be supported in a given CP/M system.  The IOBYTE
is easily set using the command:

        STAT <logical device> = <physical device>

The CP/M logical devices are CON:, RDR:, PUN:, and LST:; each of
these can be assigned to one of four physical devices.  The IOBYTE
can be initialized by the BOOT entry point of the BIOS and
interpreted by the BIOS I/O entry points CONST, CONIN, CONOUT, LIST,
PUNCH, and READER.  Depending on the setting of the IOBYTE,
different I/O drivers can be selected by the BIOS.  For example,
setting LST:=TTY: might cause LIST output to be directed to a serial
port, while setting LST:=LPT: causes LIST output to be directed to a
parallel port.

K:  Abbreviation for kilobyte.  See kilobyte.

keyword:  See command keyword.

kilobyte (K):  1024 bytes or 0400H bytes of memory.  This is a
standard unit of memory.  For example, the Intel 8080 supports up to
64K of memory address space or 65,536 bytes.  1024 kilobytes equal
one megabyte, or over one million bytes.

linker:  Utility program used to combine relocatable object modules
into an absolute file ready for execution.  For example, LINK-80   
creates either a COM or PRL file from relocatable REL files, such as
those produced by PL/I-80   .

LIST:  A BIOS entry point to a routine that sends a character to the
list device, usually a printer.

list device:  Device such as a printer onto which data can be listed
or printed.

LISTST:  BIOS entry point to a routine that returns the ready status
of the list device.

loader:  Utility program that brings an absolute program image into
memory ready for execution under the operating system, or a utility
used to make such an image.  For example, LOAD prepares an absolute
COM file from the assembler hex file output that is ready to be
executed under CP/M.

logged in:  Made known to the operating system, in reference to
drives.  A drive is logged in when it is selected by the user or an
executing process.  It remains selected or logged in until you
change disks in a floppy disk drive or enter CTRL-C at the command
level, or until a BDOS Function 0 is executed.

logical:  Representation of something that might or might not be the


                               H-12





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


same in its actual physical form.  For example, a hard disk can
occupy one physical drive, yet you can divide the available storage
on it to appear to the user as if it were in several different
drives.  These apparent drives are the logical drives.

logical sector:  See sector.

logical-to-physical sector translation table:  See XLT.

LSC:  Diskdef macro library parameter specifying the last physical
sector number.

LST:  Logical CP/M list device, usually a printer.  The CP/M list
device is an output-only device referenced through the LIST and
LISTST entry points of the BIOS.  The STAT command allows assignment
of LST: to one of the physical devices:  TTY:, CRT:, LPT:, or UL1:,
provided these devices and the IOBYTE are implemented in the LIST
and LISTST entry points of your CP/M BIOS module.  The CP/NET
command NETWORK allows assignment of LST: to a list device on a
network master.  For example, PIP LST:=TEST.SUB prints the file
TEST.SUB on the list device.

macro assembler:  Assembler code translator providing macro
processing facilities.  Macro definitions allow groups of
instructions to be stored and substituted in the source program as
the macro names are encountered.  Definitions and invocations can be
nested and macro parameters can be formed to pass arbitrary strings
of text to a specific macro for substitution during expansion.

megabyte:  Over one million bytes; 1024 kilobytes.  See byte, and
kilobyte.

microprocessor:  Silicon chip that is the central processing unit
(CPU) of the microcomputer.  The Intel 8080 and the Zilog Z80 are
microprocessors commonly used in CP/M systems.

MOVCPM image:  Memory image of the CP/M system created by MOVCPM.
This image can be saved as a disk file using the SAVE command or
placed on the system tracks using the SYSGEN command without
specifying a source drive.  This image varies, depending on the
presence of a one-sector or two-sector boot.  If the boot is less
than 128 bytes (one sector), the boot begins at 0900H, the CP/M
system at 0980H, and the BIOS at 1F80H.  Otherwise, the boot is at
0900H, the CP/M system at 1000H, and the BIOS at 2000H.  In a CP/M
1.4 system with a one-sector boot, the addresses are the same as for
the CP/M 2 system--except that the BIOS begins at 1E80H instead of
1F80H.

MP/M:  Multi-Programming Monitor control program.  A microcomputer
operating system supporting multi-terminal access with multi-
programming at each terminal.

multi-programming:  The capability of initiating and executing more
than one program at a time.  These programs, usually called
processes, are time-shared, each receiving a slice of CPU time on a
round-robin basis.  See concurrency.


                               H-13




CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


nibble:  One half of a byte, usually the high-order or low-order 4
bits in a byte.

OFF:  Two-byte parameter in the disk parameter block at DPB + 13
bytes.  This value specifies the number of reserved system tracks.
The disk directory begins in the first sector of track OFF.

OFS:  Diskdef macro library parameter specifying the number of
reserved system tracks.  See OFF.

operating system:  Collection of programs that supervises the
execution of other programs and the management of computer
resources.  An operating system provides an orderly input/output
environment between the computer and its peripheral devices.  It
enables user-written programs to execute safely.  An operating
system standardizes the use of computer resources for the programs
running under it.

option:  One of many parameters that can be part of a command tail.
Use options to specify additional conditions for a command's
execution.

output:  Data that is sent to the console, disk, or printer.

page:  256 consecutive bytes in memory beginning on a page boundary,
whose base address is a multiple of 256 (100H) bytes.  In hex
notation, pages always begin at an address with a least significant
byte of zero.

page relocatable program:  See PRL.

page zero:  Memory region between 0000H and 0100H used to hold
critical system parameters.  Page zero functions primarily as an
interface region between user programs and the CP/M BDOS module.
Note that in non-standard systems this region is the base page of
the system and represents the first 256 bytes of memory used by the
CP/M system and user programs running under it.

parameter:  Value in the command tail that provides additional
information for the command.  Technically, a parameter is a required
element of a command.

peripheral devices:  Devices external to the CPU.  For example,
terminals, printers, and disk drives are common peripheral devices
that are not part of the processor but are used in conjunction with
it.

physical:  Characteristic of computer components, generally
hardware, that actually exist.  In programs, physical components can
be represented by logical components.

primary filename:  First 8 characters of a filename.  The primary
filename is a unique name that helps the user identify the file
contents.  A primary filename contains one to eight characters and
can include any letter or number and some special characters.  The


                               H-14





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


primary filename follows the optional drive specification and
precedes the optional filetype.

PRL:  Page relocatable program.  A page relocatable program is
stored on disk with a PRL filetype.  Page relocatable programs are
easily relocated to any page boundary and thus are suitable for
execution in a nonbanked MP/M system.

program:  Series of coded instructions that performs specific tasks
when executed by a computer.  A program can be written in a
processor-specific language or a high-level language that can be
implemented on a number of different processors.

prompt:  Any characters displayed on the video screen to help the
user decide what the next appropriate action is.  A system prompt is
a special prompt displayed by the operating system.  The alphabetic
character indicates the default drive.  Some applications programs
have their own special prompts.  See CP/M prompt.

PUN: Logical CP/M punch device.  The punch device is an output-only
device accessed through the PUNCH entry point of the BIOS.  In
certain implementations, PUN: can be a serial device such as a
modem.

PUNCH: BIOS entry point to a routine that sends a character to the
punch device.

RDR: Logical CP/M reader device.  The reader device is an input-only
device accessed through the READER entry point in the BIOS.  See
PUN:.

READ: Entry point in the BIOS to a routine that reads 128 bytes from
the currently selected drive, track, and sector into the current DMA
address.

READER: Entry point to a routine in the BIOS that reads the next
character from the currently assigned reader device.

Read-Only (R/O): Attribute that can be assigned to a disk file or a
disk drive.  When assigned to a file, the Read-Only attribute allows
you to read from that file but not write to it.  When assigned to a
drive, the Read-Only attribute allows you to read any file on the
disk, but prevents you from adding a new file, erasing or changing a
file, renaming a file, or writing on the disk.  The STAT command can
set a file or a drive to Read-Only.  Every file and drive is either
Read-Only or Read-Write.  The default setting for drives and files
is Read-Write, but an error in resetting the disk or changing media
automatically sets the drive to Read-Only until the error is
corrected.  See also ROM.

Read-Write (R/W):  Attribute that can be assigned to a disk file or
a disk drive.  The Read-Write attribute allows you to read from and
write to a specific Read-Write file or to any file on a disk that is
in a drive set to Read-Write.  A file or drive can be set to either
Read-Only or Read-Write.


                               H-15





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


record:  Group of bytes in a file.  A physical record consists of
128 bytes and is the basic unit of data transfer between the
operating system and the application program.  A logical record
might vary in length and is used to represent a unit of information.
Two 64-byte employee records can be stored in one 128-byte physical
record.  Records are grouped together to form a file.

recursive procedure:  Code that can call itself during execution.

reentrant procedure:  Code that can be called by one process while
another is already executing it.  Thus, reentrant code can be shared
between different users.  Reentrant procedures must not be self-
modifying; that is, they must be pure code and not contain data.
The data for reentrant procedures can be kept in a separate data
area or placed on the stack.

restart (RST):  One-byte call instruction usually used during
interrupt sequences and for debugger break pointing.  There are
eight restart locations, RST 0 through RST 7, whose addresses are
given by the product of 8 times the restart number.

R/O:  See Read-Only.

ROM:  Read-Only memory.  This memory can be read but not written and
so is suitable for code and preinitialized data areas only.

RST:  See restart.

R/W:  See Read-Write.

sector:  In a CP/M system, a sector is always 128 consecutive bytes.
A sector is the basic unit of data read and written on the disk by
the BIOS.  A sector can be one 128-byte record in a file or a sector
of the directory.  The BDOS always requests a logical sector number
between 0 and (SPT-1).  This is typically translated into a physical
sector by the BIOS entry point SECTRAN.  In some disk subsystems,
the disk sector size is larger than 128 bytes, usually a power of
two, such as 256, 512, 1024, or 2048 bytes.  These disk sectors are
always referred to as host sectors in CP/M documentation and should
not be confused with other references to sectors, in which cases the
CP/M 128-byte sectors should be assumed.  When the host sector size
is larger than 128 bytes, host sectors must be buffered in memory
and the 128-byte CP/M sectors must be blocked and deblocked from
them.  This can be done by adding an additional module, the blocking
and deblocking algorithm, between the BIOS disk I/O routines and the
actual disk I/O.

sectors per track (SPT):  A two-byte parameter in the disk parameter
block at DPB + 0.  The BDOS makes calls to the BIOS entry point
SECTRAN with logical sector numbers ranging between 0 and (SPT - 1)
in register BC.

SECTRAN:  Entry point to a routine in the BIOS that performs
logical-to-physical sector translation for the BDOS.



                               H-16





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


SELDSK:  Entry point to a routine in the BIOS that sets the
currently selected drive.

SETDMA:  Entry point to a routine in the BIOS that sets the
currently selected DMA address.  The DMA address is the address of a
128-byte buffer region in memory that is used to transfer data to
and from the disk in subsequent reads and writes.

SETSEC:  Entry point to a routine in the BIOS that sets the
currently selected sector.

SETTRK:  Entry point to a routine in the BIOS that sets the
currently selected track.

skew factor:  Factor that defines the logical-to-physical sector
number translation in XLT.  Logical sector numbers are used by the
BDOS and range between 0 and (SPT - 1).  Data is written in
consecutive logical 128-byte sectors grouped in data blocks.  The
number of sectors per block is given by BLS/128.  Physical sectors
on the disk media are also numbered consecutively.  If the physical
sector size is also 128 bytes, a one-to-one relationship exists
between logical and physical sectors.  The logical-to-physical
translation table (XLT) maps this relationship, and a skew factor is
typically used in generating the table entries.  For instance, if
the skew factor is 6, XLT will be:

        Logical:    0    1    2    3    4    5    6   ...   25
        Physical:   1    7   13   19   25    5   11   ...   22

The skew factor allows time for program processing without missing
the next sector.  Otherwise, the system must wait for an entire disk
revolution before reading the next logical sector.  The skew factor
can be varied, depending on hardware speed and application
processing overhead.  Note that no sector translation is done when
the physical sectors are larger than 128 bytes, as sector deblocking
is done in this case.  See also sector, SKF, and XLT.

SKF:  A diskdef macro library parameter specifying the skew factor
to be used in building XLT.  If SKF is zero, no translation table is
generated and the XLT byte in the DPH will be 0000H.

software:  Programs that contain machine-readable instructions, as
opposed to hardware, which is the actual physical components of a
computer.

source file:  ASCII text file usually created with an editor that is
an input file to a system program, such as a language translator or
text formatter.

SP:  Stack pointer.  See stack.







                               H-17





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


spooling:  Process of accumulating printer output in a file while
the printer is busy.  The file is printed when the printer becomes
free; a program does not have to wait for the slow printing process.

SPT:  See sectors per track.

stack:  Reserved area of memory where the processor saves the return
address when a call instruction is received.  When a return
instruction is encountered, the processor restores the current
address on the stack to the program counter.  Data such as the
contents of the registers can also be saved on the stack.  The push
instruction places data on the stack and the pop instruction removes
it.  An item is pushed onto the stack by decrementing the stack
pointer (SP) by 2 and writing the item at the SP address.  In other
words, the stack grows downward in memory.

syntax:  Format for entering a given command.

SYS:  See system attribute.

SYSGEN image:  Memory image of the CP/M system created by SYSGEN
when a destination drive is not specified.  This is the same as the
MOVCPM image that can be read by SYSGEN if a source drive is not
specified.  See MOVCPM image.

system attribute (SYS):  File attribute.  You can give a file the
system attribute by using the SYS option in the STAT command or by
using the set file attributes function, BDOS Function 12.  A file
with the SYS attribute is not displayed in response to a DIR
command.  If you give a file with user number 0 the SYS attribute,
you can read and execute that file from any user number on the same
drive.  Use this feature to make your commonly used programs
available under any user number.

system prompt: Symbol displayed by the operating system indicating
that the system is ready to receive input.  See prompt and CP/M
prompt.

system tracks:  Tracks reserved on the disk for the CP/M system.
The number of system tracks is specified by the parameter OFF in the
disk parameter block (DPB).  The system tracks for a drive always
precede its data tracks.  The command SYSGEN copies the CP/M system
from the system tracks to memory, and vice versa.  The standard
SYSGEN utility copies 26 sectors from track 0 and 26 sectors from
track 1.  When the system tracks contain additional sectors or
tracks to be copied, a customized SYSGEN must be used.

terminal:  See console.

TPA:  Transient Program Area.  Area in memory where user programs
run and store data.  This area is a region of memory beginning at
0100H and extending to the base of the CP/M system in high memory.
The first module of the CP/M system is the CCP, which can be
overwritten by a user program.  If so, the TPA is extended to the
base of the CP/M BDOS module.  If the CCP is overwritten, the user


                               H-18





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


program must terminate with either a system reset (Function 0) call
or a jump to location zero in page zero.  The address of the base of
the CP/M BDOS is stored in location 0006H in page zero least
significant byte first.

track:  Data on the disk media is accessed by combination of track
and sector numbers.  Tracks form concentric rings on the disk; the
standard IBM single-density disks have 77 tracks.  Each track
consists of a fixed number of numbered sectors.  Tracks are numbered
from zero to one less than the number of tracks on the disk.

Transient Program Area:  See TPA.

upward compatible:  Term meaning that a program created for the
previously released operating system, or compiler, runs under the
newly released version of the same operating system.

USER:  Term used in CP/M and MP/M systems to distinguish distinct
regions of the directory.

user number:  Number assigned to files in the disk directory so that
different users need only deal with their own files and have their
own directories, even though they are all working from the same
disk.  In CP/M, files can be divided into 16 user groups.

utility:  Tool.  Program that enables the user to perform certain
operations, such as copying files, erasing files, and editing files.
The utilities are created for the convenience of programmers and
users.

vector:  Location in memory.  An entry point into the operating
system used for making system calls or interrupt handling.

warm start:  Program termination by a jump to the warm start vector
at location 0000H, a system reset (BDOS Function 0), or a CTRL-C
typed at the keyboard.  A warm start reinitializes the disk
subsystem and returns control to the CP/M operating system at the
CCP level.  The warm start vector is simply a jump to the WBOOT
entry point in the BIOS.

WBOOT:  Entry point to a routine in the BIOS used when a warm start
occurs.  A warm start is performed when a user program branches to
location 0000H, when the CPU is reset from the front panel, or when
the user types CTRL-C.  The CCP and BDOS are reloaded from the
system tracks of drive A.

wildcard characters:  Special characters that match certain
specified items.  In CP/M there are two wildcard characters:  ? and
*.  The ? can be substituted for any single character in a filename,
and the * can be substituted for the primary filename, the filetype,
or both.  By placing wildcard characters in filenames, the user
creates an ambiguous filename and can quickly reference one or more
files.




                               H-19





CP/M Operating System Manual                          H  Glossary


word:  16-bit or two-byte value, such as an address value.  Although
the Intel 8080 is an 8-bit CPU, addresses occupy two bytes and are
called word values.

WRITE:  Entry point to a routine in the BIOS that writes the record
at the currently selected DMA address to the currently selected
drive, track, and sector.

XLT:  Logical-to-physical sector translation table located in the
BIOS.  SECTRAN uses XLT to perform logical-to-physical sector number
translation.  XLT also refers to the two-byte address in the disk
parameter header at DPBASE + 0.  If this parameter is zero, no
sector translation takes place.  Otherwise this parameter is the
address of the translation table.

ZERO PAGE:  See page zero.


End of Appendix H






































                               H-20








Appendix I

CP/M Error Messages



      Messages come from several different sources.  CP/M displays
error messages when there are errors in calls to the Basic Disk
Operating System (BDOS).  CP/M also displays messages when there are
errors in command lines.  Each utility supplied with CP/M has its
own set of messages.  The following lists CP/M messages and utility
messages.  One might see messages other than those listed here if
one is running an application program.  Check the application
program's documentation for explanations of those messages.


                 Table I-1.  CP/M Error Messages

F
     Message        Meaning

     ?

                    DDT.  This message has four possible
                    meanings:

                     o DDT does not understand the assembly
                       language instruction.
                     o The file cannot be opened.
                     o A checksum error occurred in a HEX
                       file.
                     o The assembler/disassembler was
                       overlayed.


     ABORTED

                    PIP.  You stopped a PIP operation by
                    pressing a key.


     ASM Error Messages

                    D   Data error:  data statement element
                        cannot be placed in specified data
                        area.

                    E   Expression error:  expression cannot
                        be evaluated during assembly.

                    L   Label error:  label cannot appear in
                        this context (might be duplicate
                        label).





                               I-1





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     ASM Error Messages (continued)

                    N   Not implemented:  unimplemented
                        features, such as macros, are
                        trapped.

                    O   Overflow:  expression is too complex
                        to evaluate.

                    P   Phase error:  label value changes on
                        two passes through assembly.

                    R   Register error:  the value specified
                        as a register is incompatible with
                        the code.

                    S   Syntax error:  improperly formed
                        expression.

                    U   Undefined label:  label used does not
                        exist.

                    V   Value error:  improperly formed
                        operand encountered in an expression.


     BAD DELIMITER

                    STAT.  Check command line for typing
                    errors.


     Bad Load

                    CCP error message, or SAVE error message.


     Bdos Err On d:

                    Basic Disk Operating System error on the
                    designated drive:  CP/M replaces d: with
                    the drive specification of the drive where
                    the error occurred.  This message is
                    followed by one of the four phrases in the
                    situations described below.








                               I-2





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     Bdos Err On d: Bad Sector

                    This message appears when CP/M finds no
                    disk in the drive, when the disk is
                    improperly formatted, when the drive latch
                    is open, or when power to the drive is
                    off.  Check for one of these situations
                    and try again.  This could also indicate a
                    hardware problem or a worn or improperly
                    formatted disk.  Press ^C to terminate the
                    program and return to CP/M, or press
                    RETURN to ignore the error.


     Bdos Err On d: File R/O

                    You tried to erase, rename, or set file
                    attributes on a Read-Only file.  The file
                    should first be set to Read-Write (R/W)
                    with the command:  STAT filespec $R/W.


     Bdos Err On d: R/O

                    Drive has been assigned Read-Only status
                    with a STAT command, or the disk in the
                    drive has been changed without being
                    initialized with a ^C.  CP/M terminates
                    the current program as soon as you press
                    any key.


     Bdos Err on d: Select

                    CP/M received a command line specifying a
                    nonexistent drive.  CP/M terminates the
                    current program as soon as you press any
                    key.  Press RETURN or CTRL-C to recover.


     Break "x" at c

                    ED.  "x" is one of the symbols described
                    below and c is the command letter being
                    executed when the error occurred.

                    #   Search failure.  ED cannot find the
                        string specified in an F, S, or N
                        command.




                               I-3





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

                    ?   Unrecognized command letter c.  ED
                        does not recognize the indicated
                        command letter, or an E, H, Q, or O
                        command is not alone on its command
                        line.

                    O   The file specified in an R command
                        cannot be found.

                    >   Buffer full.  ED cannot put any more
                        characters in the memory buffer, or
                        the string specified in an F, N, or S
                        command is too long.

                    E   Command aborted.  A keystroke at the
                        console aborted command execution.

                        Break "x" at c (continued)

                    F   Disk or directory full.  This error is
                        followed by either the disk or
                        directory full message.  Refer to the
                        recovery procedures listed under
                        these messages.


     CANNOT CLOSE DESTINATION FILE--\{filespec\}

                    PIP.  An output file cannot be closed.
                    You should take appropriate action after
                    checking to see if the correct disk is in
                    the drive and that the disk is not write-
                    protected.


     Cannot close, R/O
     CANNOT CLOSE FILES

                    CP/M cannot write to the file.  This
                    usually occurs because the disk is write-
                    protected.

                    ASM.  An output file cannot be closed.
                    This is a fatal error that terminates ASM
                    execution.  Check to see that the disk is
                    in the drive, and that the disk is not
                    write-protected.






                               I-4





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

                    DDT.  The disk file written by a W command
                    cannot be closed.  This is a fatal error
                    that terminates DDT execution.  Check if
                    the correct disk is in the drive and that
                    the disk is not write-protected.

                    SUBMIT.  This error can occur during
                    SUBMIT file processing.  Check if the
                    correct system disk is in the A drive and
                    that the disk is not write-protected.  The
                    SUBMIT job can be restarted after
                    rebooting CP/M.


     CANNOT READ

                    PIP.  PIP cannot read the specified
                    source.  Reader cannot be implemented.


     CANNOT WRITE

                    PIP.  The destination specified in the PIP
                    command is illegal.  You probably
                    specified an input device as a
                    destination.


     Checksum error

                    PIP.  A HEX record checksum error was
                    encountered.  The HEX record that produced
                    the error must be corrected, probably by
                    recreating the HEX file.


     CHECKSUM ERROR
     LOAD ADDRESS hhhh
     ERROR ADDRESS hhhh
     BYTES READ:
     hhhh:

                    LOAD.  File contains incorrect data.
                    Regenerate HEX file from the source.


     Command Buffer Overflow

                    SUBMIT.  The SUBMIT buffer allows up to
                    2048 characters in the input file.



                               I-5





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     Command too long

                    SUBMIT.  A command in the SUBMIT file
                    cannot exceed 125 characters.


     CORRECT ERROR, TYPE RETURN OR CTRL-Z

                    PIP.  A HEX record checksum was
                    encountered during the transfer of a HEX
                    file.  The HEX file with the checksum
                    error should be corrected, probably by
                    recreating the HEX file.


     DESTINATION IS R/O, DELETE (Y/N)?

                    PIP.  The destination file specified in a
                    PIP command already exists and it is Read-
                    Only.  If you type Y, the destination file
                    is deleted before the file copy is done.


     Directory full

                    ED.  There is not enough directory space
                    for the file being written to the
                    destination disk.  You can use the
                    OXfilespec command to erase any
                    unnecessary files on the disk without
                    leaving the editor.

                    SUBMIT.  There is not enough directory
                    space to write the $$$.SUB file used for
                    processing SUBMITs.  Erase some files or
                    select a new disk and retry.


     Disk full

                    ED.  There is not enough disk space for
                    the output file.  This error can occur on
                    the W, E, H, or X commands.  If it occurs
                    with X command, you can repeat the command
                    prefixing the filename with a different
                    drive.







                               I-6





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     DISK READ ERROR--\{filespec\}

                    PIP.  The input disk file specified in a
                    PIP command cannot be read properly.  This
                    is usually the result of an unexpected
                    end-of-file.  Correct the problem in your
                    file.


     DISK WRITE ERROR--\{filespec\}

                    DDT.  A disk write operation cannot be
                    successfully performed during a W command,
                    probably due to a full disk.  You should
                    either erase some unnecessary files or get
                    another disk with more space.

                    PIP.  A disk write operation cannot be
                    successfully performed during a PIP
                    command, probably due to a full disk.  You
                    should either erase some unnecessary files
                    or get another disk with more space and
                    execute PIP again.

                    SUBMIT.  The SUBMIT program cannot write
                    the $$$.SUB file to the disk.  Erase some
                    files, or select a new disk and try again.


     ERROR: BAD PARAMETER

                    PIP.  You entered an illegal parameter in
                    a PIP command.  Retype the entry
                    correctly.


     ERROR: CANNOT OPEN SOURCE, LOAD ADDRESS hhhh

                    LOAD.  Displayed if LOAD cannot find the
                    specified file or if no filename is
                    specified.


     ERROR: CANNOT CLOSE FILE, LOAD ADDRESS hhhh

                    LOAD.  Caused by an error code returned by
                    a BDOS function call.  Disk might be
                    write-protected.





                               I-7





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     ERROR: CANNOT OPEN SOURCE, LOAD ADDRESS hhhh

                    LOAD.  Cannot find source file.  Check
                    disk directory.


     ERROR: DISK READ, LOAD ADDRESS hhhh

                    LOAD.  Caused by an error code returned by
                    a BDOS function call.


     ERROR: DISK WRITE, LOAD ADDRESS hhhh

                    LOAD.  Destination disk is full.


     ERROR: INVERTED LOAD ADDRESS, LOAD ADDRESS hhhh

                    LOAD.  The address of a record was too far
                    from the address of the previously-
                    processed record.  This is an internal
                    limitation of LOAD, but it can be
                    circumvented.  Use DDT to read the HEX
                    file into memory, then use a SAVE command
                    to store the memory image file on disk.


     ERROR: NO MORE DIRECTORY SPACE, LOAD ADDRESS hhhh

                    LOAD.  Disk directory is full.


     Error on line nnn message

                    SUBMIT.  The SUBMIT program displays its
                    messages in the format shown above, where
                    nnn represents the line number of the
                    SUBMIT file.  Refer to the message
                    following the line number.


     FILE ERROR

                    ED.  Disk or directory is full, and ED
                    cannot write anything more on the disk.
                    This is a fatal error, so make sure there
                    is enough space on the disk to hold a
                    second copy of the file before invoking
                    ED.



                               I-8





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     FILE EXISTS

                    You have asked CP/M to create or rename a
                    file using a file specification that is
                    already assigned to another file.  Either
                    delete the existing file or use another
                    file specification.

                    REN.  The new name specified is the name
                    of a file that already exists.  You cannot
                    rename a file with the name of an existing
                    file.  If you want to replace an existing
                    file with a newer version of the same
                    file, either rename or erase the existing
                    file, or use the PIP utility.


     File exists, erase it

                    ED.  The destination filename already
                    exists when you are placing the
                    destination file on a different disk than
                    the source.  It should be erased or
                    another disk selected to receive the
                    output file.


     ** FILE IS READ/ONLY **

                    ED.  The file specified in the command to
                    invoke ED has the Read-Only attribute.  Ed
                    can read the file so that the user can
                    examine it, but ED cannot change a Read-
                    Only file.


     File Not Found

                    CP/M cannot find the specified file.
                    Check that you have entered the correct
                    drive specification or that you have the
                    correct disk in the drive.

                    ED.  ED cannot find the specified file.
                    Check that you have entered the correct
                    drive specification or that you have the
                    correct disk in the drive.

                    STAT.  STAT cannot find the specified
                    file.  The message might appear if you
                    omit the drive specification.  Check to
                    see if the correct disk is in the drive.


                               I-9




CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     FILE NOT FOUND--\{filespec\}

                    PIP.  An input file that you have
                    specified does not exist.


     Filename required

                    ED.  You typed the ED command without a
                    filename.  Reenter the ED command followed
                    by the name of the file you want to edit
                    or create.


     hhhh??=dd

                    DDT.  The ?? indicates DDT does not know
                    how to represent the hexadecimal value dd
                    encountered at address hhhh in 8080
                    assembly language.  dd is not an 8080
                    machine instruction opcode.


     Insufficient memory

                    DDT.  There is not enough memory to load
                    the file specified in an R or E command.


     Invalid Assignment

                    STAT.  You specified an invalid drive or
                    file assignment, or misspelled a device
                    name.  This error message might be
                    followed by a list of the valid file
                    assignments that can follow a filename.
                    If an invalid drive assignment was
                    attempted the message Use: d:=RO is
                    displayed, showing the proper syntax for
                    drive assignments.













                               I-10





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     Invalid control character

                    SUBMIT.  The only valid control characters
                    in the SUBMIT files of the type SUB are ^
                    A through ^ Z.  Note that in a SUBMIT file
                    the control character is represented by
                    typing the circumflex, ^, not by pressing
                    the control key.


     INVALID DIGIT--\{filespec\}

                    PIP.  An invalid HEX digit has been
                    encountered while reading a HEX file.  The
                    HEX file with the invalid HEX digit should
                    be corrected, probably by recreating the
                    HEX file.


     Invalid Disk Assignment

                    STAT.  Might appear if you follow the
                    drive specification with anything except
                    =R/O.


     INVALID DISK SELECT

                    CP/M received a command line specifying a
                    nonexistent drive, or the disk in the
                    drive is improperly formatted.  CP/M
                    terminates the current program as soon as
                    you press any key.


     INVALID DRIVE NAME (Use A, B, C, or D)

                    SYSGEN.  SYSGEN recognizes only drives A,
                    B, C, and D as valid destinations for
                    system generation.


     Invalid File Indicator

                    STAT.  Appears if you do not specify RO,
                    RW, DIR, or SYS.







                               I-11





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     INVALID FORMAT

                    PIP.  The format of your PIP command is
                    illegal.  See the description of the PIP
                    command.


     INVALID HEX DIGIT
     LOAD ADDRESS hhhh
     ERROR ADDRESS hhhh
     BYTES READ:
     hhhh

                    LOAD.  File contains incorrect HEX digit.


     INVALID MEMORY SIZE

                    MOVCPM.  Specify a value less than 64K or
                    your computer's actual memory size.


     INVALID SEPARATOR

                    PIP.  You have placed an invalid character
                    for a separator between two input
                    filenames.


     INVALID USER NUMBER

                    PIP.  You have specified a user number
                    greater than 15.  User numbers are in the
                    range 0 to 15.


     n?

                    USER.  You specified a number greater than
                    fifteen for a user area number.  For
                    example, if you type USER 18<cr>, the
                    screen displays 18?.











                               I-12





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     NO DIRECTORY SPACE

                    ASM.  The disk directory is full.  Erase
                    some files to make room for PRN and HEX
                    files.  The directory can usually hold
                    only 64 filenames.


     NO DIRECTORY SPACE--\{filespec\}

                    PIP.  There is not enough directory space
                    for the output file.  You should either
                    erase some unnecessary files or get
                    another disk with more directory space and
                    execute PIP again.


     NO FILE--\{filespec\}

                    DIR, ERA, REN, PIP.  CP/M cannot find the
                    specified file, or no files exist.

                    ASM.  The indicated source or include file
                    cannot be found on the indicated drive.

                    DDT.  The file specified in an R or E
                    command cannot be found on the disk.


     NO INPUT FILE PRESENT ON DISK

                    DUMP.  The file you requested does not
                    exist.


     No memory

                    There is not enough (buffer?) memory
                    available for loading the program
                    specified.


     NO SOURCE FILE ON DISK

                    SYSGEN.  SYSGEN cannot find CP/M either in
                    CPMxx.com form or on the system tracks of
                    the source disk.






                               I-13





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     NO SOURCE FILE PRESENT

                    ASM.  The assembler cannot find the file
                    you specified.  Either you mistyped the
                    file specification in your command line,
                    or the filetype is not ASM.


     NO SPACE

                    SAVE.  Too many files are already on the
                    disk, or no room is left on the disk to
                    save the information.


     No SUB file present

                    SUBMIT.  For SUBMIT to operate properly,
                    you must create a file with filetype of
                    SUB.  The SUB file contains usual CP/M
                    commands.  Use one command per line.


     NOT A CHARACTER SOURCE

                    PIP.  The source specified in your PIP
                    command is illegal.  You have probably
                    specified an output device as a source.


     ** NOT DELETED **

                    PIP.  PIP did not delete the file, which
                    might have had the R/O attribute.


     NOT FOUND

                    PIP.  PIP cannot find the specified file.


     OUTPUT FILE WRITE ERROR

                    ASM.  You specified a write-protected disk
                    as the destination for the PRN and HEX
                    files, or the disk has no space left.
                    Correct the problem before assembling your
                    program.





                               I-14





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     Parameter error

                    SUBMIT.  Within the SUBMIT file of type
                    sub, valid parameters are $0 through $9.


     PARAMETER ERROR, TYPE RETURN TO IGNORE

                    SYSGEN.  If you press RETURN, SYSGEN
                    proceeds without processing the invalid
                    parameter.


     QUIT NOT FOUND

                    PIP.  The string argument to a Q parameter
                    was not found in your input file.


     Read error

                    TYPE.  An error occurred when reading the
                    file specified in the type command.  Check
                    the disk and try again.  The STAT filespec
                    command can diagnose trouble.


     READER STOPPING

                    PIP.  Reader operation interrupted.


     Record Too Long

                    PIP.  PIP cannot process a record longer
                    than 128 bytes.


     Requires CP/M 2.0 or later

                    XSUB.  XSUB requires the facilities of
                    CP/M 2.0 or newer version.











                               I-15





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     Requires CP/M 2.0 or new for operation

                    PIP.  This version of PIP requires the
                    facilities of CP/M 2.0 or newer version.


     START NOT FOUND

                    PIP.  The string argument to an S
                    parameter cannot be found in the source
                    file.


     SOURCE FILE INCOMPLETE

                    SYSGEN.  SYSGEN cannot use your CP/M
                    source file.


     SOURCE FILE NAME ERROR

                    ASM.  When you assemble a file, you cannot
                    use the wildcard characters * and ? in the
                    filename. Only one file can be assembled
                    at a time.


     SOURCE FILE READ ERROR

                    ASM.  The assembler cannot understand the
                    information in the file containing the
                    assembly-language program.  Portions of
                    another file might have been written over
                    your assembly-language file, or
                    information was not properly saved on the
                    disk.  Use the TYPE command to locate the
                    error.  Assembly-language files contain
                    the letters, symbols, and numbers that
                    appear on your keyboard.  If your screen
                    displays unrecognizable output or behaves
                    strangely, you have found where computer
                    instructions have crept into your file.


     SYNCHRONIZATION ERROR

                    MOVCPM.  The MOVCPM utility is being used
                    with the wrong CP/M system.





                               I-16





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     "SYSTEM" FILE NOT ACCESSIBLE

                    You tried to access a file set to SYS with
                    the STAT command.


     ** TOO MANY FILES **

                    STAT.  There is not enough memory for STAT
                    to sort the files specified, or more than
                    512 files were specified.


     UNEXPECTED END OF HEX FILE--\{filespec\}

                    PIP.  An end-of-file was encountered prior
                    to a termination HEX record.  The HEX file
                    without a termination record should be
                    corrected, probably by recreating the HEX
                    file.


     Unrecognized Destination

                    PIP.  Check command line for valid
                    destination.


     Use: STAT d:=RO

                    STAT.  An invalid STAT drive command was
                    given.  The only valid drive assignment in
                    STAT is STAT d:=RO.


     VERIFY ERROR:--\{filespec\}

                    PIP.  When copying with the V option, PIP
                    found a difference when rereading the data
                    just written and comparing it to the data
                    in its memory buffer.  Usually this
                    indicates a failure of either the
                    destination disk or drive.


     WRONG CP/M VERSION (REQUIRES 2.0)


     XSUB ACTIVE

                    SUBMIT.  XSUB has been invoked.


                               I-17





CP/M Operating System Manual               I  CP/M Error Messages


                     Table I-1.  (continued)

     Message        Meaning

     XSUB ALREADY PRESENT

                    SUBMIT.  XSUB is already active in memory.

     Your input?

                    If CP/M cannot find the command you
                    specified, it returns the command name you
                    entered followed by a question mark.
                    Check that you have typed the command line
                    correctly, or that the command you
                    requested exists as a .COM file on the
                    default or specified disk.
K


End of Appendix I





































                               I-18


